Add an extension UX guide (#2030)
sourcegraph/sourcegraph: doc/extensions/authoring/ux_style_guide.md

# Extension UX style guide

In addition to what features your extension has, the way your extension behaves from the user's perspective has a big impact on whether or not they'll decide to keep your extension enabled.

> Your extension has to compete against alternative methods of achieving the same goal. For example, users can find the definition of a function in the same file in 2 seconds by double-clicking the variable, pressing <kbd>Ctr-C</kbd> <kbd>Ctr-F</kbd> <kbd>Ctr-V</kbd> and hitting <kbd>Enter</kbd> a few times, or in a different file in 10 seconds by running a Sourcegraph search. Users often times have finely-tuned development environments and can get there in 15 seconds by running `git stash && git checkout <branch> && code src/main.go`. If your extension does not respond in less than that time on every action, users will learn to avoid your extension and probably disable it.

Reviewer: `<kbd>` is a single key, a combination like this should be `<kbd>ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd>` (<kbd>ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd>), not `<kbd>Ctr-C</kbd>` (<kbd>Ctr-C</kbd>)

Reviewer: The other sections start with an instruction. It's not clear to me what the instruction of this section is. "Be performant"?

Author: Fixed the `<kbd>`s

This is just another paragraph in the introduction meant to build up some context that's useful when thinking about UX.

**Guide the user**

> If your extension requires a few settings, gently inform them that it won't work until they provide more information. A file header icon that triggers a prompt usually does the trick nicely.

Reviewer: Just an icon wouldn't really tell me I need to update settings or click it

Author: I suppose the icon could be an orange ⚠️ sign while settings are missing, or maybe the extension could present a dismissible message once. Feel free to change this if you have a more effective example.

Every pixel is precious space, and if your extension is taking up more than most, it will be seen as obtrusive and is more likely to get disabled. Consider the macOS menu bar: nothing in the API prevents the networking app from spelling its name out "Wireless Network Connections" as opposed to showing the icon by itself, but you probably couldn't count to ten before people would try to hide it if it did.

Space in the file header is particularly tight, so consider providing more information when the user hovers over your button rather than having it always present in the label.

**Avoid overcommunicating what your extension is doing**

Most of the time the user just opened a pull request and are busy reading the code. Displaying UI elements to them at that time takes attention away from their task at hand. Defer that communication until the user is most likely to want that information (e.g. once they hover over a token).

When faced with a tradeoff between reassuring the user that progress is being made and respecting their attention, err on the quiet side and try to reduce the response time instead of making the progress updates more detailed and granular.

> If you absolutely must show messages to a user, ensure the information is actionable and doesn't require any knowledge about the implementation of your extension in order to understand what it means.

Reviewer: This entire section reads like it is trying to discourage the use of the progress API, which I disagree with. Telling the user what is going on is _always_ better than leaving them waiting for a response to their action wondering if the extension works at all.

Why does a progress report have to be "actionable"? When is that the case? The point of a progress notifications is not that they are actionable, it's to report what is going on. The action was already taken, this is a status report, and there is no action to take to e.g. speed it up.

# Extension UX style guide

In addition to what features your extension has, the way your extension behaves from the user's perspective has a big impact on whether or not they'll decide to keep your extension enabled.

> Your extension has to compete against alternative methods of achieving the same goal. For example, users can find the definition of a function in the same file in 2 seconds by double-clicking the variable, pressing <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>C</kbd> <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>F</kbd> <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>V</kbd> and hitting <kbd>Enter</kbd> a few times, or in a different file in 10 seconds by running a Sourcegraph search. Users often times have finely-tuned development environments and can get there in 15 seconds by running `git stash && git checkout <branch> && code src/main.go`. If your extension does not respond in less than that time on every action, users will learn to avoid your extension and probably disable it.

Reviewer 2: I feel like these examples are a bit long-winded, and focus too much on _time_ and not enough on _value_. It takes a lot longer than 2 seconds for lang-typescript to take you to the definition of a function in the same file when starting from a blank slate state, but you will not deactivate it because it gives you a lot more value than that without switching contexts (eg. peeking definitions in other files or across repositories directly in your browser, without switching context to your development environment). Possible rewording:

```suggestion
Your extension must provide clear value to the user, rather than clutter his experience with information that could be obtained through simpler and potentially faster methods, for instance a simple text search in the current document.
```

Author: Yeah, this was a bit too specific to code intelligence. I applied your suggestion with minor edits.

**Guide the user**

If your extension requires a few settings, gently inform them that it won't work until they provide more information. A file header icon that triggers a prompt usually does the trick nicely.

> Ask yourself, could a new user set up your extension properly without the README?

Reviewer 2: This not the case for our own language extensions, and there is a clear use case for extensions that require additional, README-guided setup. Suggested wording:

```suggestion
Try to replicate the experience of a new user activating your extension for the first time. Can he set up your extension properly and intuitively without reading the README? If your extension requires external setup to function properly (eg. a server component), does the README provide clear, precise and reproducible steps to setting up these components?
```

Author: Sounds good, I applied this suggestion with minor edits.

Space in the file header is particularly tight, so consider providing more information when the user hovers over your button rather than having it always present in the label.

**Avoid overcommunicating what your extension is doing**

Most of the time the user just opened a pull request and are busy reading the code. Displaying UI elements to them at that time takes attention away from their task at hand. Defer that communication until the user is most likely to want that information (e.g. once they hover over a token).

When faced with a tradeoff between reassuring the user that progress is being made and respecting their attention, err on the quiet side and try to reduce the response time instead of making the progress updates more detailed and granular.

**Write actionable and descriptive errors**

> Most users aren't experts in the subject of your extension. If the user did something wrong, point out what your extension noticed, what it expected, and what the user can do to fix or work around the problem.

Reviewer 2: Note: we are currently lacking a proper way of doing so (Related: #1868, #1471)

Author: I tweaked the wording to target the error message content (e.g. in the browser console). We can update this once we add other ways to show errors.
